From the perspective of evolutionary and developmental biologists, a horse’s hoof is literally a giant middle finger. It seems to be the remnant of a foot that once had five full toes, with only three remaining visible — two vestigial digits are still on either side of the large, hardened middle digit, but there is no trace of the others. The hoof has been held up as a sterling example of the idea that if something isn’t working for a creature, it may be shed completely, with an excess toe or two left on the cutting room floor of evolution.

But when Kathryn Kavanagh, a biologist at the University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth, was sorting through preserved horse embryos recently, she saw something that at first she couldn’t quite believe. In the very early days of gestation, in the area of the foot where the hoof eventually forms, Dr. Kavanagh counted clusters of developing cells representing toes. And there were not three — there were unmistakably five.

The missing toes had in fact never left the horse, Dr. Kavanagh and her collaborators report in a paper published Wednesday in the Proceedings of the Royal Society B. The finding suggests that certain stages of development cannot be changed, even if, in the adult animal, they leave no visible trace.

The window of time when all five toes were visible was very short. Because it can be difficult for scientists to obtain large numbers of horse embryos at different stages to study, it is possible that scientists who earlier studied horse anatomy assumed that horses had at most three toes because they didn’t get the glimpse Dr. Kavanagh did.